cline_docs/techContext.md, before:

# Technical Context

## Current Technologies

### Core Technologies
- Python 3.8+
- pandas for data processing
- PyPDF2 for PDF parsing
- OpenAI API for AI processing
- Google Sheets API for data storage

### CLI Frameworks
1. Legacy System (grok.py):
   - Typer for CLI interface
   - Rich for terminal UI
   - Click for command handling

2. New System (main.py):
   - Typer for CLI interface
   - Rich for enhanced UI
   - Click for advanced command handling

### Data Processing
- pandas for DataFrame operations
- numpy for numerical operations
- PyPDF2 for PDF parsing
- csv for CSV file handling

### AI Integration
- OpenAI API
- GPT-3.5/4 models
- Prompt engineering
- Response parsing

### Google Integration
- Google Sheets API v4
- Google OAuth2
- Service Account authentication

## Development Setup

### Environment
```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your credentials
```

### Configuration Files
1. `.env`:
   - API keys
   - Credentials paths
   - Environment settings

2. `client_config.yaml`:
   - Client information
   - Parser settings
   - Sheet configuration

3. `sheets_config.yaml`:
   - Sheet IDs
   - Format settings
   - Column mappings

## Technical Constraints

### Parser Limitations
- PDF format compatibility
- Statement format changes
- OCR reliability
- CSV format variations

### AI Processing
- API rate limits
- Token limits
- Cost considerations
- Response validation

### Google Sheets
- Row limits
- API quotas
- Format restrictions
- Update frequency

## Planned Improvements

### Architecture
1. Class-based Pipeline:
   ```python
   class DataPipeline:
       def __init__(self, client):
           self.client = client
           self.state = ClientState(client)
           self.processor = AIProcessor(client)
           self.sheets = SheetsManager(client)
   ```

2. Enhanced Error Handling:
   ```python
   class ErrorHandler:
       def handle_parser_error(self, error):
           log_error(error)
           notify_admin(error)
           suggest_fix(error)
   ```

3. Progress Tracking:
   ```python
   class ProgressTracker:
       def update(self, stage, progress):
           self.state.update(stage, progress)
           self.notify_observers(stage, progress)
   ```

### Testing
1. Unit Tests:
   - Parser tests
   - AI processing tests
   - Sheet integration tests

2. Integration Tests:
   - End-to-end pipeline tests
   - Client configuration tests
   - Error handling tests

3. Performance Tests:
   - Large file processing
   - Batch processing
   - API rate limiting

### Documentation
1. Code Documentation:
   - Type hints
   - Docstrings
   - Example usage

2. User Documentation:
   - Setup guides
   - Usage examples
   - Troubleshooting

3. API Documentation:
   - Endpoint descriptions
   - Request/response formats
   - Error codes

## Technologies Used
- Python 3.11+
- PyPDF2 for PDF processing
- pandas for data manipulation
- PyYAML for configuration management
- Typer for CLI interface
- pytest for testing

## Development Setup
1. **Environment**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

2. **Directory Structure**
   ```
   PDF-extractor/
   ├── clients/              # Client-specific data
   ├── data/                 # Default data directory
   ├── dataextractai/        # Main package
   │   ├── parsers/         # Statement parsers
   │   ├── utils/           # Shared utilities
   │   └── tests/           # Test suite
   └── scripts/             # CLI scripts
   ```

3. **Configuration**
   - Client config: `clients/<client_name>/client_config.yaml`
   - Global config: `dataextractai/utils/config.py`
   - Parser configs: `dataextractai/parsers/*.py`

## Technical Constraints
1. **File Formats**
   - PDF files must be text-based (not scanned)
   - CSV files must follow institution-specific formats
   - Maximum file size: 100MB per file

2. **Directory Structure**
   - Client directories must be created before use
   - Input directories must contain valid files
   - Output directories are created automatically

3. **Processing Limits**
   - Maximum 1000 transactions per file
   - Maximum 100 files per directory
   - Maximum 10 concurrent processes

4. **Memory Usage**
   - Maximum 2GB RAM per process
   - Maximum 10GB total memory usage
   - Automatic cleanup of temporary files

## Dependencies
```
pandas>=2.0.0
PyPDF2>=3.0.0
PyYAML>=6.0.0
typer>=0.9.0
pytest>=7.0.0
openpyxl>=3.0.0
python-dateutil>=2.8.0
```

## Technology Stack

### Core System (Command-Line)
1. Python Environment
   - Python 3.8+
   - Virtual environment management
   - Key packages:
     - pandas: Data processing
     - pdfplumber/PyMuPDF: PDF parsing
     - typer: CLI interface
     - gspread: Google Sheets API

2. External Services
   - OpenAI API (GPT-3.5/4)
   - Google Sheets API
   - Google Drive API

3. Data Storage
   - File system for PDFs/CSVs
   - CSV/Excel for processed data
   - Google Sheets for final output

### Web Interface (In Development)
1. Frontend
   - React
   - TypeScript
   - Mantine UI
   - WebSocket client

2. Backend
   - FastAPI
   - SQLite database
   - SQLAlchemy ORM
   - WebSocket server

## Development Setup

### Environment Setup
```bash
# Core system
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt

# API keys
export OPENAI_API_KEY=xxx
export GOOGLE_SHEETS_CREDENTIALS_PATH=xxx
export GOOGLE_SHEETS_ID=xxx
```

### Directory Structure
```
project_root/
├── data/
│   ├── input/          # Raw statements
│   └── output/         # Processed data
├── dataextractai/      # Core package
├── scripts/            # CLI tools
├── web/               # Web interface
│   ├── frontend/
│   └── backend/
└── tests/             # Test suite
```

### Configuration Files
1. Parser Config
   - Input/output paths
   - File patterns
   - Parser mappings

2. AI Config
   - Model selection
   - System prompts
   - Batch settings

3. Google Sheets Config
   - Credentials
   - Sheet mappings
   - Column configurations

## Development Workflow

### Command-Line Version
1. Place files in input directories
2. Run parsers: `python scripts/grok.py run-parsers`
3. Process with AI: `python scripts/grok.py process`
4. Upload to sheets: `python scripts/grok.py upload-to-sheet`

### Web Version (Future)
1. Start backend: `uvicorn main:app`
2. Start frontend: `npm start`
3. Access UI: `http://localhost:3000`

## Testing

### Test Structure
```
tests/
├── parsers/           # Parser tests
├── classifiers/       # AI tests
├── utils/             # Utility tests
└── integration/       # End-to-end tests
```

### Running Tests
```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run specific test
pytest tests/parsers/test_wellsfargo.py
```

## Deployment

### Command-Line Version
1. Clone repository
2. Set up Python environment
3. Configure API keys
4. Create input directories
5. Run parsers

### Web Version (Future)
1. Build frontend
2. Configure backend
3. Set up database
4. Deploy services

## Technical Constraints

1. API Limitations
   - Image size limit: 20MB
   - Base64 encoding required
   - Rate limiting considerations
   - Token usage monitoring

2. PDF Processing
   - Image quality requirements
   - Memory usage for large PDFs
   - Processing time per page
   - Multi-page handling

3. Data Management
   - CSV file size limits
   - Database growth control
   - Disk space management
   - Backup considerations

## Security Considerations

1. API Key Management
   - Environment variables
   - .env file usage
   - Key rotation policy
   - Access control

2. Data Protection
   - Local storage only
   - No cloud transmission
   - File permissions
   - Secure deletion

3. Error Handling
   - No sensitive data in logs
   - Secure error reporting
   - Failed transaction handling
   - Recovery procedures

## Performance Optimization

1. Image Processing
   - Automatic resizing
   - Format optimization
   - Memory management
   - Batch processing

2. API Usage
   - Request batching
   - Response caching
   - Error retries
   - Rate limiting

3. Data Storage
   - Efficient CSV writing
   - Database indexing
   - File organization
   - Cleanup procedures

Commit message:

feat(parser): Add robust extract_metadata method to ChaseCheckingParser - Returns all key metadata fields (bank_name, account_type, parser_name, file_type, account_number, statement_date, account_holder_name, address, statement_period_start, statement_period_end) for any Chase Checking PDF. Method is callable on demand and tested across all statement files. Updated documentation and Memory Bank to reflect this new pattern. Ready for downstream consumers (e.g., LedgerDev, CLI, Django).

cline_docs/techContext.md, after:

# Technical Context

## Current Technologies

### Core Technologies
- Python 3.8+
- pandas for data processing
- PyPDF2 for PDF parsing
- OpenAI API for AI processing
- Google Sheets API for data storage

### CLI Frameworks
1. Legacy System (grok.py):
   - Typer for CLI interface
   - Rich for terminal UI
   - Click for command handling

2. New System (main.py):
   - Typer for CLI interface
   - Rich for enhanced UI
   - Click for advanced command handling

### Data Processing
- pandas for DataFrame operations
- numpy for numerical operations
- PyPDF2 for PDF parsing
- csv for CSV file handling

### AI Integration
- OpenAI API
- GPT-3.5/4 models
- Prompt engineering
- Response parsing

### Google Integration
- Google Sheets API v4
- Google OAuth2
- Service Account authentication

## Development Setup

### Environment
```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your credentials
```

### Configuration Files
1. `.env`:
   - API keys
   - Credentials paths
   - Environment settings

2. `client_config.yaml`:
   - Client information
   - Parser settings
   - Sheet configuration

3. `sheets_config.yaml`:
   - Sheet IDs
   - Format settings
   - Column mappings

## Technical Constraints

### Parser Limitations
- PDF format compatibility
- Statement format changes
- OCR reliability
- CSV format variations

### AI Processing
- API rate limits
- Token limits
- Cost considerations
- Response validation

### Google Sheets
- Row limits
- API quotas
- Format restrictions
- Update frequency

## Planned Improvements

### Architecture
1. Class-based Pipeline:
   ```python
   class DataPipeline:
       def __init__(self, client):
           self.client = client
           self.state = ClientState(client)
           self.processor = AIProcessor(client)
           self.sheets = SheetsManager(client)
   ```

2. Enhanced Error Handling:
   ```python
   class ErrorHandler:
       def handle_parser_error(self, error):
           log_error(error)
           notify_admin(error)
           suggest_fix(error)
   ```

3. Progress Tracking:
   ```python
   class ProgressTracker:
       def update(self, stage, progress):
           self.state.update(stage, progress)
           self.notify_observers(stage, progress)
   ```

### Testing
1. Unit Tests:
   - Parser tests
   - AI processing tests
   - Sheet integration tests

2. Integration Tests:
   - End-to-end pipeline tests
   - Client configuration tests
   - Error handling tests

3. Performance Tests:
   - Large file processing
   - Batch processing
   - API rate limiting

### Documentation
1. Code Documentation:
   - Type hints
   - Docstrings
   - Example usage

2. User Documentation:
   - Setup guides
   - Usage examples
   - Troubleshooting

3. API Documentation:
   - Endpoint descriptions
   - Request/response formats
   - Error codes

## Technologies Used
- Python 3.11+
- PyPDF2 for PDF processing
- pandas for data manipulation
- PyYAML for configuration management
- Typer for CLI interface
- pytest for testing

## Development Setup
1. **Environment**
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

2. **Directory Structure**
   ```
   PDF-extractor/
   ├── clients/              # Client-specific data
   ├── data/                 # Default data directory
   ├── dataextractai/        # Main package
   │   ├── parsers/         # Statement parsers
   │   ├── utils/           # Shared utilities
   │   └── tests/           # Test suite
   └── scripts/             # CLI scripts
   ```

3. **Configuration**
   - Client config: `clients/<client_name>/client_config.yaml`
   - Global config: `dataextractai/utils/config.py`
   - Parser configs: `dataextractai/parsers/*.py`

## Technical Constraints
1. **File Formats**
   - PDF files must be text-based (not scanned)
   - CSV files must follow institution-specific formats
   - Maximum file size: 100MB per file

2. **Directory Structure**
   - Client directories must be created before use
   - Input directories must contain valid files
   - Output directories are created automatically

3. **Processing Limits**
   - Maximum 1000 transactions per file
   - Maximum 100 files per directory
   - Maximum 10 concurrent processes

4. **Memory Usage**
   - Maximum 2GB RAM per process
   - Maximum 10GB total memory usage
   - Automatic cleanup of temporary files

## Dependencies
```
pandas>=2.0.0
PyPDF2>=3.0.0
PyYAML>=6.0.0
typer>=0.9.0
pytest>=7.0.0
openpyxl>=3.0.0
python-dateutil>=2.8.0
```

## Technology Stack

### Core System (Command-Line)
1. Python Environment
   - Python 3.8+
   - Virtual environment management
   - Key packages:
     - pandas: Data processing
     - pdfplumber/PyMuPDF: PDF parsing
     - typer: CLI interface
     - gspread: Google Sheets API

2. External Services
   - OpenAI API (GPT-3.5/4)
   - Google Sheets API
   - Google Drive API

3. Data Storage
   - File system for PDFs/CSVs
   - CSV/Excel for processed data
   - Google Sheets for final output

### Web Interface (In Development)
1. Frontend
   - React
   - TypeScript
   - Mantine UI
   - WebSocket client

2. Backend
   - FastAPI
   - SQLite database
   - SQLAlchemy ORM
   - WebSocket server

## Development Setup

### Environment Setup
```bash
# Core system
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt

# API keys
export OPENAI_API_KEY=xxx
export GOOGLE_SHEETS_CREDENTIALS_PATH=xxx
export GOOGLE_SHEETS_ID=xxx
```

### Directory Structure
```
project_root/
├── data/
│   ├── input/          # Raw statements
│   └── output/         # Processed data
├── dataextractai/      # Core package
├── scripts/            # CLI tools
├── web/               # Web interface
│   ├── frontend/
│   └── backend/
└── tests/             # Test suite
```

### Configuration Files
1. Parser Config
   - Input/output paths
   - File patterns
   - Parser mappings

2. AI Config
   - Model selection
   - System prompts
   - Batch settings

3. Google Sheets Config
   - Credentials
   - Sheet mappings
   - Column configurations

## Development Workflow

### Command-Line Version
1. Place files in input directories
2. Run parsers: `python scripts/grok.py run-parsers`
3. Process with AI: `python scripts/grok.py process`
4. Upload to sheets: `python scripts/grok.py upload-to-sheet`

### Web Version (Future)
1. Start backend: `uvicorn main:app`
2. Start frontend: `npm start`
3. Access UI: `http://localhost:3000`

## Testing

### Test Structure
```
tests/
├── parsers/           # Parser tests
├── classifiers/       # AI tests
├── utils/             # Utility tests
└── integration/       # End-to-end tests
```

### Running Tests
```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run specific test
pytest tests/parsers/test_wellsfargo.py
```

## Deployment

### Command-Line Version
1. Clone repository
2. Set up Python environment
3. Configure API keys
4. Create input directories
5. Run parsers

### Web Version (Future)
1. Build frontend
2. Configure backend
3. Set up database
4. Deploy services

## Technical Constraints

1. API Limitations
   - Image size limit: 20MB
   - Base64 encoding required
   - Rate limiting considerations
   - Token usage monitoring

2. PDF Processing
   - Image quality requirements
   - Memory usage for large PDFs
   - Processing time per page
   - Multi-page handling

3. Data Management
   - CSV file size limits
   - Database growth control
   - Disk space management
   - Backup considerations

## Security Considerations

1. API Key Management
   - Environment variables
   - .env file usage
   - Key rotation policy
   - Access control

2. Data Protection
   - Local storage only
   - No cloud transmission
   - File permissions
   - Secure deletion

3. Error Handling
   - No sensitive data in logs
   - Secure error reporting
   - Failed transaction handling
   - Recovery procedures

## Performance Optimization

1. Image Processing
   - Automatic resizing
   - Format optimization
   - Memory management
   - Batch processing

2. API Usage
   - Request batching
   - Response caching
   - Error retries
   - Rate limiting

3. Data Storage
   - Efficient CSV writing
   - Database indexing
   - File organization
   - Cleanup procedures

## Parser Registration and Detection (NEW)
- All modularized parsers (CSV and PDF) inherit from BaseParser and implement a strict can_parse method.
- autodiscover_parsers() recursively imports all parser modules, ensuring every parser is registered in the ParserRegistry.
- The detection utility uses the registry to select the correct parser for any file, or returns None if no match is found.
- Detection logic is strict: CSV parsers require exact header and column order matches; PDF parsers use robust, account-type-specific phrase detection.
- The detection function is available both as a CLI and as a callable for module users.
- **NEW:** Modular parsers (starting with ChaseCheckingParser) now expose an `extract_metadata(input_path)` method, providing robust, on-demand metadata extraction for any statement file. This is callable by downstream consumers and tested across all available files.
